lab3/README.md, before:

# Lab 3 - Fake and Real Nodes

## Overview

This lab is all about Kubernetes nodes. After completing this lab, you should
be able to answer the following questions:

* What are *Fake Nodes*?
* What are *Real Nodes*?
* What are *Node Label Selectors* used for?

## Prerequisites

The prerequisites are the same as in [Lab 1](../lab1/README.md).

## Create a kind cluster

You find the kind configuration for this lab [here](kind-config-vcluster-lab-3.yaml).

```bash
kind create cluster --config kind-config-vcluster-lab-3.yaml
```
```
Creating cluster "vcluster-host" ...
 ✓ Ensuring node image (kindest/node:v1.27.3) 🖼
 ✓ Preparing nodes 📦 📦 📦 📦
 ✓ Writing configuration 📜
 ✓ Starting control-plane 🕹️
 ✓ Installing CNI 🔌
 ✓ Installing StorageClass 💾
 ✓ Joining worker nodes 🚜
Set kubectl context to "kind-vcluster-host"
You can now use your cluster with:

kubectl cluster-info --context kind-vcluster-host

Have a nice day! 👋
```

After creating the kind cluster, your kube config context should automatically
switch to the new kind cluster. If you are not using a kind cluster, please
change the context to your host cluster.

```bash
kubectl config current-context
```
```
kind-vcluster-host
```

## Fake Nodes

*Fake Nodes* are the default in vcluster. When using *Fake Nodes* a node will
be created for each `spec.nodeName` encountered in a `Pod` definition. Why is
this the default?

As reading the node information from the Kube API on the host cluster is a
privileged operation, RBAC configuration would need to be in place to allow
vcluster (eg the `syncer`) to read that information.

Once the last `Pod` is removed from a *Fake Node* the node will be deleted.

### Create a vcluster

```bash
vcluster create fake-nodes
```

### Questions

1. How many nodes are in your Kind cluster?
2. How many nodes are in your vcluster?
3. What is the difference between a node in the Kind and the vcluster?

### Deploy a Pod

```bash
kubectl apply --filename resources/pod01
```

### Questions

1. How many nodes are in your Kind cluster?
2. How many nodes are in your vcluster?

### Deploy a second Pod

```bash
kubectl apply --filename resources/pod02
```

### Questions

1. How many nodes are in your Kind cluster?
2. How many nodes are in your vcluster?

### Delete the second Pod

```bash
kubectl delete pods pod02
```

### Questions

1. How many nodes are in your Kind cluster?
2. How many nodes are in your vcluster?

### Create a deployment

```bash
kubectl apply --filename resources/deployment01.yaml
```

### Questions

1. On which nodes are the pods running?
2. Can you explain the node assignment?

### Delete the vcluster

```bash
vcluster delete fake-nodes
```
```
info   Stopping docker proxy...
info   Delete vcluster fake-nodes...
done √ Successfully deleted virtual cluster fake-nodes in namespace vcluster-fake-nodes
done √ Successfully deleted virtual cluster namespace vcluster-fake-nodes
```

### Fake Nodes on Kind

When using *Kind* the difference between the host (*Kind*) cluster and the
vcluster will not be significant. The reason being, that RBAC is not a
problem on *Kind* an vcluster is able to read the nodes.

To better illustrate the difference, here is an example taken from a vcluster
running on the `sandbox` DTP tooling cluster.

#### DTP sandbox node

```bash
kubectl get nodes ip-10-44-12-111.eu-central-1.compute.internal | \
    --output yaml | \
    --context dok-gitops-argo-sandbox | \
    jq '.metadata.labels'
```
```json
{
  "agentpool": "argo1",
  "beta.kubernetes.io/arch": "amd64",
  "beta.kubernetes.io/instance-type": "m6a.xlarge",
  "beta.kubernetes.io/os": "linux",
  "dynatrace.com/tier": "system",
  "eks.amazonaws.com/capacityType": "ON_DEMAND",
  "eks.amazonaws.com/nodegroup": "dok-gitops-argo-sandbox-argo1v2-ng",
  "eks.amazonaws.com/nodegroup-image": "ami-01de92e208a15ab26",
  "eks.amazonaws.com/sourceLaunchTemplateId": "lt-09f1f5b0945e551a1",
  "eks.amazonaws.com/sourceLaunchTemplateVersion": "10",
  "failure-domain.beta.kubernetes.io/region": "eu-central-1",
  "failure-domain.beta.kubernetes.io/zone": "eu-central-1a",
  "k8s.io/cloud-provider-aws": "dc5b5acd02892ba995e2dfcdf6090d1d",
  "kubernetes.io/arch": "amd64",
  "kubernetes.io/hostname": "ip-10-44-12-111.eu-central-1.compute.internal",
  "kubernetes.io/os": "linux",
  "node.kubernetes.io/instance-type": "m6a.xlarge",
  "topology.ebs.csi.aws.com/zone": "eu-central-1a",
  "topology.kubernetes.io/region": "eu-central-1",
  "topology.kubernetes.io/zone": "eu-central-1a",
  "vpc.amazonaws.com/eniConfig": "eu-central-1a"
}
```

#### vcluster node one DTP sandbox

```bash
kubectl get nodes ip-10-44-12-111.eu-central-1.compute.internal --output yaml | \
    jq '.metadata.labels'
```
```json
{
  "beta.kubernetes.io/arch": "amd64",
  "beta.kubernetes.io/os": "linux",
  "kubernetes.io/arch": "amd64",
  "kubernetes.io/hostname": "fake-ip-10-44-12-111.eu-central-1.compute.internal",
  "kubernetes.io/os": "linux",
  "vcluster.loft.sh/fake-node": "true"

```

## Real Nodes

*Real Nodes* in comparison to *Fake Nodes*, will sync the real node
information from the host cluster. As stated in
[Fake Nodes](#fake-nodes) RBAC configuration is needed for the vcluster to
be able to access the Kube API on the host cluster.

> **Note**
> This is **not** true for *Kind*, as described in [Fake Nodes](#fake-nodes)
> as well.

To configure syncing the real nodes, some values need to be set when deploying
the vcluster. This can either be done on as an argument - when using the
`vcluster` CLI command - or by using a YAML file with `vcluster` and Helm.

The following values need to be set for to enable real node sync:

```yaml
sync:
  nodes:
    enabled: true
```
Pass the filename as the `--extra-values` parameter to `vcluster` when
creating the vcluster.

As is the case for [Fake Nodes](#fake-nodes), only real nodes where a Pod
is running will be synced.

### Create vcluster

```bash
vcluster create real-nodes --extra-values resources/real-nodes-values.yaml
```

### Questions

1. How many nodes are in your Kind cluster?
2. How many nodes are in your vcluster?
3. What is the difference between a node in the Kind and the vcluster?

### Create a deployment

```bash
kubectl apply --filename resources/deployment01.yaml
```

### Questions

1. On which nodes are the pods running?
2. Can you explain the node assignment?

### Delete the vcluster

```bash
vcluster delete real-nodes
```
```
vcluster delete real-nodes
info   Stopping docker proxy...
info   Delete vcluster real-nodes...
done √ Successfully deleted virtual cluster real-nodes in namespace vcluster-real-nodes
done √ Successfully deleted virtual cluster namespace vcluster-real-nodes
```

## All Real Nodes

*All Real Nodes* is very similar to [Real Nodes](#real-nodes). The difference
is that with **All Real Nodes** all nodes are synced from the host cluster,
not only the ones where a Pod is running.

To sync all real nodes, an additional line must be added to the values file:

```yaml
sync:
  nodes:
    enabled: true
    syncAllNodes: true
```

You can also call `vcluster` with the `--sync-all-nodes` flag to enable this
mode.

> **Note**
> You must pass the `--fake-nodes false` flag, for the `--sync-all-nodes` flag
> to work.

### Create vcluster

```bash
vcluster create all-real-nodes --extra-values resources/all-real-nodes-values.yaml
```

### Questions

1. How many nodes are in your Kind cluster?
2. How many nodes are in your vcluster?
3. What is the difference between a node in the Kind and the vcluster?

### Create a deployment

```bash
kubectl apply --filename resources/deployment01.yaml
```

### Questions

1. On which nodes are the pods running?
2. Can you explain the node assignment?

### Delete the vcluster

```bash
vcluster delete all-real-nodes
```
```
vcluster delete all-real-nodes
info   Stopping docker proxy...
info   Delete vcluster all-real-nodes...
done √ Successfully deleted virtual cluster all-real-nodes in namespace vcluster-all-real-nodes
done √ Successfully deleted virtual cluster namespace vcluster-all-real-nodes
```

## Real Nodes with Label Selector

### Add labels to Kind nodes

```bash
kubectl label --context kind-vcluster-host nodes vcluster-host-worker2 "example.com/tier=vcluster"
kubectl label --context kind-vcluster-host nodes vcluster-host-worker3 "example.com/tier=vcluster"
```

### Create vcluster

```bash
vcluster create real-nodes-selector --extra-values resources/real-nodes-selector-values.yaml
```

### Questions

1. How many nodes are in your Kind cluster?
2. How many nodes are in your vcluster?
3. How are the vcluster nodes labeled?

### Create a deployment

```bash
kubectl apply --filename resources/deployment01.yaml
```

### Questions

1. On which nodes are the pods running?
2. Can you explain the node assignment?

### Delete the vcluster

```bash
vcluster delete real-nodes-selector
```
```
info   Stopping docker proxy...
info   Delete vcluster real-nodes-selector...
done √ Successfully deleted virtual cluster real-nodes-selector in namespace vcluster-real-nodes-selector
done √ Successfully deleted virtual cluster namespace vcluster-real-nodes-selector
```
## Cleanup

### Delete the Kind cluster

```bash
kind delete cluster --name vcluster-host
Deleting cluster "vcluster-host" ...
Deleted nodes: ["vcluster-host-worker3" "vcluster-host-control-plane" "vcluster-host-worker" "vcluster-host-worker2"]
```

Commit message:

Add text for nodes w/ label selector.

lab3/README.md, after:

# Lab 3 - Fake and Real Nodes

## Overview

This lab is all about Kubernetes nodes. After completing this lab, you should
be able to answer the following questions:

* What are *Fake Nodes*?
* What are *Real Nodes*?
* What are *Node Label Selectors* used for?

## Prerequisites

The prerequisites are the same as in [Lab 1](../lab1/README.md).

## Create a kind cluster

You find the kind configuration for this lab [here](kind-config-vcluster-lab-3.yaml).

```bash
kind create cluster --config kind-config-vcluster-lab-3.yaml
```
```
Creating cluster "vcluster-host" ...
 ✓ Ensuring node image (kindest/node:v1.27.3) 🖼
 ✓ Preparing nodes 📦 📦 📦 📦
 ✓ Writing configuration 📜
 ✓ Starting control-plane 🕹️
 ✓ Installing CNI 🔌
 ✓ Installing StorageClass 💾
 ✓ Joining worker nodes 🚜
Set kubectl context to "kind-vcluster-host"
You can now use your cluster with:

kubectl cluster-info --context kind-vcluster-host

Have a nice day! 👋
```

After creating the kind cluster, your kube config context should automatically
switch to the new kind cluster. If you are not using a kind cluster, please
change the context to your host cluster.

```bash
kubectl config current-context
```
```
kind-vcluster-host
```

## Fake Nodes

*Fake Nodes* are the default in vcluster. When using *Fake Nodes* a node will
be created for each `spec.nodeName` encountered in a `Pod` definition. Why is
this the default?

As reading the node information from the Kube API on the host cluster is a
privileged operation, RBAC configuration would need to be in place to allow
vcluster (eg the `syncer`) to read that information.

Once the last `Pod` is removed from a *Fake Node* the node will be deleted.

### Create a vcluster

```bash
vcluster create fake-nodes
```

### Questions

1. How many nodes are in your Kind cluster?
2. How many nodes are in your vcluster?
3. What is the difference between a node in the Kind and the vcluster?

### Deploy a Pod

```bash
kubectl apply --filename resources/pod01
```

### Questions

1. How many nodes are in your Kind cluster?
2. How many nodes are in your vcluster?

### Deploy a second Pod

```bash
kubectl apply --filename resources/pod02
```

### Questions

1. How many nodes are in your Kind cluster?
2. How many nodes are in your vcluster?

### Delete the second Pod

```bash
kubectl delete pods pod02
```

### Questions

1. How many nodes are in your Kind cluster?
2. How many nodes are in your vcluster?

### Create a deployment

```bash
kubectl apply --filename resources/deployment01.yaml
```

### Questions

1. On which nodes are the pods running?
2. Can you explain the node assignment?

### Delete the vcluster

```bash
vcluster delete fake-nodes
```
```
info   Stopping docker proxy...
info   Delete vcluster fake-nodes...
done √ Successfully deleted virtual cluster fake-nodes in namespace vcluster-fake-nodes
done √ Successfully deleted virtual cluster namespace vcluster-fake-nodes
```

### Fake Nodes on Kind

When using *Kind* the difference between the host (*Kind*) cluster and the
vcluster will not be significant. The reason being, that RBAC is not a
problem on *Kind* an vcluster is able to read the nodes.

To better illustrate the difference, here is an example taken from a vcluster
running on the `sandbox` DTP tooling cluster.

#### DTP sandbox node

```bash
kubectl get nodes ip-10-44-12-111.eu-central-1.compute.internal | \
    --output yaml | \
    --context dok-gitops-argo-sandbox | \
    jq '.metadata.labels'
```
```json
{
  "agentpool": "argo1",
  "beta.kubernetes.io/arch": "amd64",
  "beta.kubernetes.io/instance-type": "m6a.xlarge",
  "beta.kubernetes.io/os": "linux",
  "dynatrace.com/tier": "system",
  "eks.amazonaws.com/capacityType": "ON_DEMAND",
  "eks.amazonaws.com/nodegroup": "dok-gitops-argo-sandbox-argo1v2-ng",
  "eks.amazonaws.com/nodegroup-image": "ami-01de92e208a15ab26",
  "eks.amazonaws.com/sourceLaunchTemplateId": "lt-09f1f5b0945e551a1",
  "eks.amazonaws.com/sourceLaunchTemplateVersion": "10",
  "failure-domain.beta.kubernetes.io/region": "eu-central-1",
  "failure-domain.beta.kubernetes.io/zone": "eu-central-1a",
  "k8s.io/cloud-provider-aws": "dc5b5acd02892ba995e2dfcdf6090d1d",
  "kubernetes.io/arch": "amd64",
  "kubernetes.io/hostname": "ip-10-44-12-111.eu-central-1.compute.internal",
  "kubernetes.io/os": "linux",
  "node.kubernetes.io/instance-type": "m6a.xlarge",
  "topology.ebs.csi.aws.com/zone": "eu-central-1a",
  "topology.kubernetes.io/region": "eu-central-1",
  "topology.kubernetes.io/zone": "eu-central-1a",
  "vpc.amazonaws.com/eniConfig": "eu-central-1a"
}
```

#### vcluster node one DTP sandbox

```bash
kubectl get nodes ip-10-44-12-111.eu-central-1.compute.internal --output yaml | \
    jq '.metadata.labels'
```
```json
{
  "beta.kubernetes.io/arch": "amd64",
  "beta.kubernetes.io/os": "linux",
  "kubernetes.io/arch": "amd64",
  "kubernetes.io/hostname": "fake-ip-10-44-12-111.eu-central-1.compute.internal",
  "kubernetes.io/os": "linux",
  "vcluster.loft.sh/fake-node": "true"

```

## Real Nodes

*Real Nodes* in comparison to *Fake Nodes*, will sync the real node
information from the host cluster. As stated in
[Fake Nodes](#fake-nodes) RBAC configuration is needed for the vcluster to
be able to access the Kube API on the host cluster.

> **Note**
> This is **not** true for *Kind*, as described in [Fake Nodes](#fake-nodes)
> as well.

To configure syncing the real nodes, some values need to be set when deploying
the vcluster. This can either be done on as an argument - when using the
`vcluster` CLI command - or by using a YAML file with `vcluster` and Helm.

The following values need to be set for to enable real node sync:

```yaml
sync:
  nodes:
    enabled: true
```
Pass the filename as the `--extra-values` parameter to `vcluster` when
creating the vcluster.

As is the case for [Fake Nodes](#fake-nodes), only real nodes where a Pod
is running will be synced.

### Create vcluster

```bash
vcluster create real-nodes --extra-values resources/real-nodes-values.yaml
```

### Questions

1. How many nodes are in your Kind cluster?
2. How many nodes are in your vcluster?
3. What is the difference between a node in the Kind and the vcluster?

### Create a deployment

```bash
kubectl apply --filename resources/deployment01.yaml
```

### Questions

1. On which nodes are the pods running?
2. Can you explain the node assignment?

### Delete the vcluster

```bash
vcluster delete real-nodes
```
```
vcluster delete real-nodes
info   Stopping docker proxy...
info   Delete vcluster real-nodes...
done √ Successfully deleted virtual cluster real-nodes in namespace vcluster-real-nodes
done √ Successfully deleted virtual cluster namespace vcluster-real-nodes
```

## All Real Nodes

*All Real Nodes* is very similar to [Real Nodes](#real-nodes). The difference
is that with **All Real Nodes** all nodes are synced from the host cluster,
not only the ones where a Pod is running.

To sync all real nodes, an additional line must be added to the values file:

```yaml
sync:
  nodes:
    enabled: true
    syncAllNodes: true
```

You can also call `vcluster` with the `--sync-all-nodes` flag to enable this
mode.

> **Note**
> You must pass the `--fake-nodes false` flag, for the `--sync-all-nodes` flag
> to work.

### Create vcluster

```bash
vcluster create all-real-nodes --extra-values resources/all-real-nodes-values.yaml
```

### Questions

1. How many nodes are in your Kind cluster?
2. How many nodes are in your vcluster?
3. What is the difference between a node in the Kind and the vcluster?

### Create a deployment

```bash
kubectl apply --filename resources/deployment01.yaml
```

### Questions

1. On which nodes are the pods running?
2. Can you explain the node assignment?

### Delete the vcluster

```bash
vcluster delete all-real-nodes
```
```
vcluster delete all-real-nodes
info   Stopping docker proxy...
info   Delete vcluster all-real-nodes...
done √ Successfully deleted virtual cluster all-real-nodes in namespace vcluster-all-real-nodes
done √ Successfully deleted virtual cluster namespace vcluster-all-real-nodes
```

## Real Nodes with Label Selector

The last option to look at is the *Real Nodes Label Selector* mode. This is
similar to [All Real Nodes](#all-real-nodes), but only nodes with a specific
label will be synced.

As with the previous modes, the settings can either be done through a file or
using the CLI. An example configuration file is shown below.

```yaml
sync:
  nodes:
    enabled: true
    nodeSelector: "example.com/tier=vcluster"
```

### Add labels to Kind nodes

```bash
kubectl label --context kind-vcluster-host nodes vcluster-host-worker2 "example.com/tier=vcluster"
kubectl label --context kind-vcluster-host nodes vcluster-host-worker3 "example.com/tier=vcluster"
```

### Create vcluster

```bash
vcluster create real-nodes-selector --extra-values resources/real-nodes-selector-values.yaml
```

### Questions

1. How many nodes are in your Kind cluster?
2. How many nodes are in your vcluster?
3. How are the vcluster nodes labeled?
4. What could be an use case for this mode?

### Create a deployment

```bash
kubectl apply --filename resources/deployment01.yaml
```

### Questions

1. On which nodes are the pods running?
2. Can you explain the node assignment?

### Delete the vcluster

```bash
vcluster delete real-nodes-selector
```
```
info   Stopping docker proxy...
info   Delete vcluster real-nodes-selector...
done √ Successfully deleted virtual cluster real-nodes-selector in namespace vcluster-real-nodes-selector
done √ Successfully deleted virtual cluster namespace vcluster-real-nodes-selector
```
## Cleanup

### Delete the Kind cluster

```bash
kind delete cluster --name vcluster-host
Deleting cluster "vcluster-host" ...
Deleted nodes: ["vcluster-host-worker3" "vcluster-host-control-plane" "vcluster-host-worker" "vcluster-host-worker2"]
```
